[docs] migrate Behat page (#270)
moodle/devdocs: general/development/tools/behat.md

| headlesschromedriver | Use Chrome with Chromedriver directly, without displaying the GUI | No | No |
| edge | Use Edge via Selenium | Yes | Yes |
| headlessedge | Use Edge via Selenium, without displaying the GUI | Yes | No |
| edgedriver | Use Edge with Edgedriver directly | No | Yes |
| headlessedgedriver | Use Edge with Edgedriver directly, without displaying the GUI | No | No |

#### chromedriver-wrapper

When using Google Chrome, you must use the correct version of the `chromedriver` browser driver for the version of Chrome that you use.

Since Google Chrome automatically updates on a regular basis, you will need to regularly upgrade your driver to match the version of Chrome that you are using.

To make this easier, a `chromedriver-wrapper` utility has been written. This inspects the version of Chrome that is in your path, and downloads the correct version of `chromedriver` for that version, before starting it.

Installation instructions can be found at [https://github.com/andrewnicols/chromedriver-wrapper](https://github.com/andrewnicols/chromedriver-wrapper).

## Getting started (basic)

This is a quick walk through to get Behat running for the first time.

> ### Setting up

Reviewer: I would suggest slightly reorganising this section in order to make it easier to navigate using the page index:
- Getting started
  - Setting up Selenium
  - Setting up your browsers
  - Setting up Moodle
  - Configure Behat for Moodle --> Initialise Behat
  - Run Behat tests
- Advanced testing

#### Setting up Selenium

Generally we recommend use of Selenium, though this is not a fixed requirement. You can use the browser's driver implementation directly but this is harder to setup for the first time.

Selenium is written in Java, and requires a recent version of the JRE to run. Please ensure that you have this installed prior to starting.

Since Moodle 3.9.5 / 3.10.2 / 3.11.0 Moodle will work with any modern version of Selenium. At time of writing that is `3.141.59`, and 4.1.0.

**Note:** There appears to be an issue with the version 4 jars - particularly in 4.1.0 that generates a **"Could not open connection: Capability value must be set"** error which appears to be an issue between Selenium and the MInkExtension for JavaScript tests - see https://githubmemory.com/repo/Behat/MinkExtension/activity for more information. The quick work around is to use the earlier version (3.141.59).

1. Download the Selenium Server (Grid) from [https://www.selenium.dev/downloads/](https://www.selenium.dev/downloads/). This is a single JAR file, put it anywhere handy.
1. Start Selenium

>    ```
>       # Version 3.141.59:
> 
>          $ java -jar selenium-server-standalone-3.141.59.jar
> 
>       # Version 4.0.0 and later:
> 
>          $ java -jar selenium-server-4.0.0-beta-3.jar standalone
>    ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ```console tile="Version 3.141.59"
java -jar selenium-server-standalone-3.141.59.jar
   ```

   ```console tile="Version 4.0.0 and later"
java -jar selenium-server-4.0.0-beta-3.jar standalone
   ```
```

Reviewer: It would be great to add the `console` type to the rest of the code and remove $ from the beginning (it will help users to copy&paste it).

> You can optionally specify a number of settings, depending on the version of Selenium that you are using, including the port to run on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip

You can optionally specify a number of settings, depending on the version of Selenium that you are using, including the port to run on.

:::
```

Both the browser, and its driver, must be placed inside your `$PATH` - this may be somewhere like `/usr/bin`, `/usr/local/bin`, or perhaps a user bin directory like `~/bin` which is present in your `$PATH`

##### Chrome

You can download Google Chrome from [https://www.google.com.au/chrome](https://www.google.com.au/chrome).

You will need the [correct version of the chromedriver](https://chromedriver.chromium.org/downloads) as per the
documentation. Alternatively you can make use of the [chromedriver-wrapper utility](/general/development/tools/behat#chromedriver-wrapper) noted in the Recommended extras sections.

Either the `chromedriver` binary must be in a directory in your `$PATH`, or the `chromedriver-wrapper/bin` folder must be in your `$PATH`.

##### Firefox

You can download Mozilla Firefox from [https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/new/](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/new/).

You will need the [correct version of geckodriver](https://github.com/mozilla/geckodriver/releases) as per the [documentation](https://firefox-source-docs.mozilla.org/testing/geckodriver/Support.html).

The `geckodriver` binary must be in a directory in your `$PATH`.

> #### Set up Moodle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Setting up Moodle
```

1. Create a new `dataroot` area for files especially for behat
2. Set the following in your Moodle `config.php`:

   ```
       $CFG->behat_dataroot = '/path/to/the/dataroot/you/created';
       $CFG->behat_wwwroot = 'http://127.0.0.1/path/to/your/site';
       $CFG->behat_prefix = 'beh_';
   ```

3. We recommend that you also include the `behat-browser-config` if you have not done so already.

   ```php
      require_once('/path/to/moodle-browser-config/init.php');
   ```

> ##### Notes about the behat_wwwroot
> 
> You will need to set the `behat_wwwroot` to your Moodle site, but it **must** use a different value to your `$CFG->wwwroot`.
> 
> One common way to do this is to use `127.0.0.1` for behat, but `localhost` for standard use. Alternatively you can add an additional hostname in your `/etc/hosts` file and use this instead.
> 
> If you use Docker, then you may be able to use `host.docker.internal` where your site is hosted on the docker host

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note About the behat_wwwroot

You will need to set the `behat_wwwroot` to your Moodle site, but it **must** use a different value to your `$CFG->wwwroot`.

One common way to do this is to use `127.0.0.1` for behat, but `localhost` for standard use. Alternatively, you can add an additional hostname in your `/etc/hosts` file and use this instead.

If you use Docker, then you may be able to use `host.docker.internal` where your site is hosted on the docker host

:::
```

> #### Configure Behat for Moodle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Initialise Behat
```

After setting your configuration, you can simply initialise behat:

```
$ php admin/tool/behat/cli/init.php
```

This will install all required Composer dependencies, install a new Moodle site, and put configuration in place

When it finishes it will give advice on how to run Behat.

#### Run Behat tests

> Before running behat, ensure that your Selenium server is running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:::warning

Before running behat, ensure that your Selenium server is running.

:::
```

```

To run one specific feature file:

```
    $ vendor/bin/behat --config /Users/nicols/Sites/moodles/sm/moodledata_behat/behatrun/behat/behat.yml `pwd`/mod/forum/tests/behat/private_replies.feature
```

To run one specific scenario within a feature file:

```
    # To run the Scenario on line 38 of the file:
    $ vendor/bin/behat --config /Users/nicols/Sites/moodles/sm/moodledata_behat/behatrun/behat/behat.yml `pwd`/mod/forum/tests/behat/private_replies.feature:38
```

To run one specific scenario by name:

```
    $ vendor/bin/behat --config /Users/nicols/Sites/moodles/sm/moodledata_behat/behatrun/behat/behat.yml --name="As a teacher I can see my own response"
```

See the upstream documentation on Behat, and Gherkin filters for more information.

##### Running using a different browser

The default browser in Behat is **Firefox**. To specify a different browser profile, you can add the `--profile` argument. For example, to use Chrome in Headless mode:

```
    $ vendor/bin/behat --config /Users/nicols/Sites/moodles/sm/moodledata_behat/behatrun/behat/behat.yml --profile=headlesschrome
```

> If you are using the `moodle-browser-config` utility, then you can use any profile listed in [moodle-browser-config](/general/development/tools/behat#pre-configured-browser-profiles-moodle-browser-config). Otherwise you can write your own browser profile configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip

If you are using the `moodle-browser-config` utility, then you can use any profile listed in [moodle-browser-config](/general/development/tools/behat#pre-configured-browser-profiles-moodle-browser-config). Otherwise you can write your own browser profile configuration.

:::
```

### Advanced testing

#### Run tests without Selenium (chromedriver, geckodriver)

Historically, Behat required Selenium server, however browsers now make use of their own automation layer. For example, Firefox uses `Geckodriver` and Chrome uses `Chromedriver`. As a result the use of Selenium itself is now optional.

The moodle-browser-config tool includes standard profiles to use these drivers directly and without the use of Selenium.

To use the drivers directly, you must run the driver itself, for example to run `chromedriver`:

```
    $ chromedriver
```

To run `geckodriver`:

```
    $ geckodriver
```

> **Note:** geckodriver runs on port 4444 by default. You cannot geckodriver at the same time as selenium.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note

geckodriver runs on port 4444 by default. You cannot geckodriver at the same time as selenium.

:::
```

The following example demonstrates how Behat might be initialised with three parallel runs, to run on all themes:

```
    $ php admin/tool/behat/cli/init.php --parallel=3 --add-core-features-to-theme
```

And then to run all tests matching the `@tool_myplugin` tag, against the `classic` theme:

```
    $ php admin/tool/behat/cli/run.php --tags="@tool_myplugin" --suite="classic"
```

##### Custom parameters for parallel runs

You can set following custom config options for parallel runs via $CFG->behat_parallel_run. It's an array of options where 1st array is for 1st run and so on.

```php
    $CFG->behat_parallel_run = [
        [
           'dbtype' => 'mysqli',
           'dblibrary' => 'native',
           'dbhost' => 'localhost',
           'dbname' => 'moodletest',
           'dbuser' => 'moodle',
           'dbpass' => 'moodle',
           'behat_prefix' => 'mdl_',
           'wd_host' => 'http://127.0.0.1:4444/wd/hub',
           'behat_wwwroot' => 'http://127.0.0.1/moodle',
           'behat_dataroot' => '/home/example/bht_moodledata'
       ],
       // ...
    ],
```

> To set different selenium servers for parallel runs, you can use following.
> 
> **NOTE:** Running parallel (headless) runs on different selenium servers avoid random focus failures.
> 
> ```php
>     $CFG->behat_parallel_run = [
>         [=> 'http://127.0.0.1:4444/wd/hub']('wd_host'),
>         [=> 'http://127.0.0.1:4445/wd/hub']('wd_host'),
>         [=> 'http://127.0.0.1:4446/wd/hub']('wd_host'),
>     ];
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set different selenium servers for parallel runs, you can use the following:

```php
    $CFG->behat_parallel_run = [
        [=> 'http://127.0.0.1:4444/wd/hub']('wd_host'),
        [=> 'http://127.0.0.1:4445/wd/hub']('wd_host'),
        [=> 'http://127.0.0.1:4446/wd/hub']('wd_host'),
    ];
```

:::tip

Running parallel (headless) runs on different selenium servers avoid random focus failures.

:::
```

Reviewer: The suggestion in this case (just clarifying to guarantee it's understood) is:

- Change the order, because the $CFG->behat_parallel_run settings were not placed in the right place.
- Add a tip admonition for the NOTE.

        --format=pretty --out=/tmp/pretty_3.txt \
        --format=moodle_progress --out=std
```

#### Rerun failed scenarios

With slow systems or parallel run you may experience see some random failures. These may happen when your system is too slow, when it is too fast, or where a page depends on external dependencies.

To help with this it is possible to rerun any failed scenarios using the `--rerun` option to Behat.

The following example runs Behat with the rerun option:

```
    $ vendor/bin/behat --config /Users/nicols/Sites/moodles/sm/moodledata_behat/behatrun/behat/behat.yml \
        --format=pretty --out=/tmp/pretty.txt \
        --format=moodle_progress --out=std \
        --rerun
```

If any single test fails then the command will return a non-zero exit code. Running the same command again will mean that only failed scenarios are run.

For a parallel run it can be called as follows:

```
    $ admin/tool/behat/cli/run.php \
        --replace="{runprocess}" \
        --format=pretty --out=/tmp/pretty_{runprocess}.txt \
        --format=moodle_progress --out=std \
        --rerun
```

> The Moodle behat runner also includes an `--auto-rerun` option which will automatically rerun failed scenarios exactly once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip

The Moodle behat runner also includes an `--auto-rerun` option which will automatically rerun failed scenarios exactly once.

:::
```

#### Running behat with specified theme

Behat can be run with any installed theme, but it must be initialised with the `-a` or `--add-core-features-to-theme` option first.

After configuring the theme can be specified using the `--suite` parameter.

> **Note:** The default theme in Moodle (boost) has the suite name `default`.
> 
> ```
>     // Initialise Behat for all themes:
>     $ php admin/tool/behat/cli/init.php --add-core-features-to-theme
> 
>     // Run Behat against all initalised themes:
>     $ vendor/bin/behat --config /Users/nicols/Sites/moodles/sm/moodledata_behat/behatrun/behat/behat.yml
> 
>     // Run Behat against just the default theme when all themes were initialised:
>     $ vendor/bin/behat --config /Users/nicols/Sites/moodles/sm/moodledata_behat/behatrun/behat/behat.yml --suite=default
> 
>     // Run Behat against just the 'classic' theme when all themes were initialised:
>     $ vendor/bin/behat --config /Users/nicols/Sites/moodles/sm/moodledata_behat/behatrun/behat/behat.yml --suite=classic
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note 

The default theme in Moodle (boost) has the suite name `default`.

```
    // Initialise Behat for all themes:
    $ php admin/tool/behat/cli/init.php --add-core-features-to-theme

    // Run Behat against all initalised themes:
    $ vendor/bin/behat --config /Users/nicols/Sites/moodles/sm/moodledata_behat/behatrun/behat/behat.yml

    // Run Behat against just the default theme when all themes were initialised:
    $ vendor/bin/behat --config /Users/nicols/Sites/moodles/sm/moodledata_behat/behatrun/behat/behat.yml --suite=default

    // Run Behat against just the 'classic' theme when all themes were initialised:
    $ vendor/bin/behat --config /Users/nicols/Sites/moodles/sm/moodledata_behat/behatrun/behat/behat.yml --suite=classic
```

:::
```

An example usage is:

```
    $ docker run -d -p 4444:4444 -v `pwd`:`pwd` selenium/standalone-firefox:latest
```

#### Change config.php file

In the Moodle `config.php` file you must change the `$CFG->behat_wwwroot` to an address that can be reached from within the docker image.

You cannot use `localhost` or `127.0.0.1` as this will be the IP address of the docker container itself.

On some more recent versions of Docker you can use `http://host.docker.internal/`, for example if my site is located at `/sm` on my development machine, I can set the following:

```php
    $CFG->behat_wwwroot = 'http://host.docker.internal/sm';
```

#### Manually configuring other browsers

If you would prefer not to use the `moodle-browser-config` tool but still wish to specify different browsers then you can do so using the `$CFG->behat_profiles` array. Each key/value pair contains a profile name, and the configuration for that profile. For example:

```php
    $CFG->behat_profiles = [
        'chrome' => [
            'browser' => 'chrome',
            'tags' => '@JavaScript',
        ],
    ];
```

> [More info about alternative browsers](https://docs.moodle.org/dev/Acceptance_testing/Browsers)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [alternative browsers](https://docs.moodle.org/dev/Acceptance_testing/Browsers) for more details.
```

## Troubleshooting

### Increasing timeouts

You may see errors such as:

```php
Javascript code and/or AJAX requests are not ready after 10 seconds.
There is a Javascript error or the code is extremely slow.
```

Sometimes this indicates a genuine problem with the code, but if you are using a slow computer, it may just mean that your browser did not finish generating parts of the UI before behat tried was finished.

If you find that this happens regularly on different scenarios then you may want to increase the timeout:

```php
    $CFG->behat_increasetimeout = 2;
```

This will increase all the timeouts by a factor of 2; if that isn't sufficient, you could use 3.

Increasing timeouts will make tests run a bit slower (because there are points where Behat waits up to a timeout to make sure something doesn't happen) so don't do this unless you need to.

> Note: This is usually an indicator that your development machine is not well tuned. A better option would be to find out where the bottleneck is. This is usually the database configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note

This is usually an indicator that your development machine is not well-tuned. A better option would be to find out where the bottleneck is. This is usually the database configuration.

:::
```

### New step definitions or features are not executed

If you are adding new tests or steps definitions update the tests list

```php
php admin/tool/behat/cli/util.php --enable
```

> ** For parallel runs, all options for initialising parallel runs are valid **

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip

For parallel runs, all options for initialising parallel runs are valid.

:::
```

### Tests are failing

<!-- cspell:ignore Bselenium -->

> If you followed all the steps and you receive an unknown weird error probably your browser version is not compatible with the Selenium version you are running. Please refer Working combinations to ensure you have correct [Acceptance testing/Browsers#Working combinations of OS.2BBrowser.2Bselenium](https://docs.moodle.org/dev/Acceptance_testing/Browsers#Working_combinations_of_OS.2BBrowser.2Bselenium) of them to run acceptance test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you followed all the steps and you receive an unknown weird error probably your browser version is not compatible with the Selenium version you are running. Please refer to [Working combinations of browsers](https://docs.moodle.org/dev/Acceptance_testing/Browsers#Working_combinations_of_OS.2BBrowser.2Bselenium) to ensure you have the correct of them to run the acceptance test.
```

- Behat is configured but not enabled on this test site.
In order to fix those errors please check that: the `behat_dataroot` has correct write permissions and that the `$CFG->behat*` variables are placed before the `lib/setup.php` include:

```php
 require_once(__DIR__ . '/lib/setup.php');
```

### Selenium server is not running

#### Chrome specific

If you are using chrome, you need to ensure that the driver matches the version of the installed chrome browser – which may change on OS updates/upgrades. Moodle or Selenium will not give the appropriate message – see [MDL-67659](https://tracker.moodle.org/browse/MDL-67659/). One solution is the one suggested in the issue and use Andrew Nicols' [Chromedriver Wrapper](https://github.com/andrewnicols/chromedriver-wrapper/) which will ensure you have the appropriate driver before running the tests.

## External links

- Vagrant profile with Moodle and Behat preconfigured: https://github.com/mackensen/moodle-hat
- Docker containers for Moodle Developers and Behat: https://github.com/moodlehq/moodle-docker

> - Docker environment with Behat preconfigured : https://github.com/tobiga/docker_moodle_environment

Reviewer: Why these External links haven't been moved to the "See also" section? I think it's easier having all them together in the same section :-)

1. Set up a default Moodle install using [moodle-docker](https://github.com/moodlehq/moodle-docker), with the database and Moodle version of your choice. See its README for more details. This will start some docker containers.
2. Initialize behat to start testing with this command, from the webserver container:

   ```
      php admin/tool/behat/cli/init.php
   ```

3. Run the behat test of your choice, from the webserver container. For instance:

   ```
      vendor/bin/behat --config /var/www/behatdata/behatrun/behat/behat.yml --tags tool_task
   ```

And you'll see something like:

```php
Moodle 4.0dev (Build: 20210507), 0b47ea0a44a092f9000729ca7b15fff23111538b
Php: 7.3.26, mysqli: 5.7.21, OS: Linux 5.4.0-66-generic x86_64
Run optional tests:

Accessibility: No
Server OS "Linux", Browser: "firefox"
Started at 09-05-2021, 06:00
...................................................................... 70
...............................
12 scenarios (12 passed)
101 steps (101 passed)
2m53.27s (47.61Mb)
```

## See also

- [Acceptance testing for the mobile app](https://docs.moodle.org/dev/Acceptance_testing_for_the_mobile_app)

> ## Information to re-home

Reviewer: I would suggest creating a separate page for this section... Otherwise, we'll probably miss/forget to move it to the right section ;-)

Reviewer: Apart from that, the "**Note:**" should be moved to admonitions ;-)
